Title: 3.6 new features
Date: 2016-12-31 11:39
Category: News
Tags: 3.6, features, release, asyncio, formatting, typing, dicts, secrets, generators, readability
Slug: 3.6_new
Authors: Bob
Summary: Finally got a chance to look into Python 3.6's new features. In this post some highlights and pointers.
cover: images/featured/python3.6.png

Python 3.6 is out for over a week now. In this post some features and pointers. [What’s New In Python 3.6](https://docs.python.org/3.6/whatsnew/3.6.html) is worth reviewing to get a full overview.

Getting it installed is supersimple. I am on Mac so I just installed the pkg file from the [downloads page](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

## Some highlights

~~~~
$ python3.6 -VV # verbose version info
Python 3.6.0 (v3.6.0:41df79263a11, Dec 22 2016, 17:23:13) 
[GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5666) (dot 3)]
~~~~

* String formatting: 

		>>> name = 'bob'
		>>> print('Hello %s' % name) # not pythonic
		>>> print('Hello {}'.format(name)) # better
		Hello bob
		>>> print(f'Hello {name}') # new in 3.6
		Hello bob
		>>> a = 2
		>>> b = 4
		>>> print(f'Look I even can do math: { 5 * (a + b) }')
		Look I even can do math: 30

* Make big numbers more readable with underscores: 

		>>> 1_000_000_000_000_000
		1000000000000000

* Type hints:

	In 3.5 you could do this already for methods:

		>>> sys.version
		'3.5.1 |Anaconda 4.0.0 (x86_64)| (default, Dec  7 2015, 11:24:55) \n[GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5577)]'
		>>> def name(name: str) -> str:
		...     return 'My name is {}'.format(name)
		... 
		>>> name('bob')
		'My name is bob'

	Now you can 'document' a standalone / instance variable's 'intent' as well:

		>>> price : float = 9.99 # saves comments

	'Intent' because nothing stops you from assigning another type: 

		>>> name : str = 'bob'
		>>> name = 2
		>>> type(name)
		<class 'int'>

	As PEP 484 states:

	> While these annotations are available at runtime through the usual __annotations__ attribute, no type checking happens at runtime . Instead, the proposal assumes the existence of a separate off-line type checker which users can run over their source code voluntarily. Essentially, such a type checker acts as a very powerful linter. 

* Asyncio:

	> Starting with Python 3.6 the asyncio module is no longer provisional and its API is considered stable.

	I have to yet work with asyncio, will do a future post. It has some nice coverage in [Fluent Python](https://www.amazon.com/Fluent-Python-Concise-Effective-Programming/dp/1491946008/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1483179119&sr=8-1&keywords=fluent+python). [This article](https://blog.jetbrains.com/pycharm/2016/12/python-3-6-a-quick-look/) by the PyCharm Team shows a nice refactoring using the new [Asynchronous Generators feature](https://docs.python.org/dev/whatsnew/3.6.html#pep-525-asynchronous-generators).

* New dict implementation: 

	> The memory usage of the new dict() is between 20% and 25% smaller compared to Python 3.5. 

	I also heard that new dicts keep their order, but read now that:

	> The order-preserving aspect of this new implementation is considered an implementation detail and should not be relied upon.

	If you need order you can use [collections.OrderedDict](https://docs.python.org/3.6/library/collections.html#collections.OrderedDict).

* New secrets module: 

	> The main purpose of the new secrets module is to provide an obvious way to reliably generate cryptographically strong pseudo-random values suitable for managing secrets, such as account authentication, tokens, and similar.

	Good to know: 

	> Note that the pseudo-random generators in the random module should NOT be used for security purposes. Use secrets on Python 3.6+ and os.urandom() on Python 3.5 and earlier.

	Of course random is fine for simulation, but for applications using cryptography, you want to use secrets.

* The pyvenv script has been deprecated in favour of python3 -m venv (new to Virtual Envs, read [our article](http://pybit.es/the-beauty-of-virtualenv.html)).

* Lot of improvements: again, worth reading through [the official release doc](https://docs.python.org/3.6/whatsnew/3.6.html). 

## 2 or 3?

Unless you are bound to Python 2.x due to environment / requirements, it is a really good time to switch to 3 now. 2.x is not actively developed anymore, all new cool stuff is added to 3 as you can see from this new big release. I use 3.x whenever I can!

---

Keep Calm and Code in Python!

-- Bob
